# Arching Effect of Planetary Regolith Simulant under Extraterrestrial Gravities\n\n**Authors:** Ruilin Li; Guoqing Zhou, Ph.D.; and Matthew R. Hall, Ph.D.\n**Journal:** Journal of Aerospace Engineering\n**DOI:** 10.1061/(ASCE)AS.1943-5525.0000927\n\n## Abstract\nAttention has been devoted to the construction of off-earth base construction and mineral mining in recent years. This paper studies the influence of extraterrestrial gravities on the arching effect surrounding deeply buried structures in planetary regolith using trapdoor experiments. Off-earth regoliths are physically simulated using a magnetically sensitive planetary regolith simulant, whereas the gravities are simulated by applying a uniform magnetic body force. The results show that the gravity has a significant influence on both the unloading rate for soil pressure on the trapdoor and the reduction in soil pressure. Both soil pressure and normalized soil pressure unload rapidly when moving the trapdoor down at a lower gravity. The unloading rate for soil pressure increases when gravity increases. However, that of the normalized soil pressure decreases. With further increases in gravity, the normalized soil pressure appears to reach a stable state. A theoretical solution for the soil pressure on the trapdoor is proposed which includes the effect of gravity-induced stress level and stress gradient on interparticle friction resistance. The predicted soil pressure demonstrates good agreement with the experimental results.\n\n## Introduction\nThe exploration of the Moon, Mars, and asteroids brings challenges in off-earth geotechnical engineering. Lunar and Martian surfaces are covered by granular regolith (0-15m deep). Soil pressure and the arching effect (redistribution of pressure on underground structures) are critical for base construction. This study uses a magnetic simulant to replicate low gravity conditions to observe these effects.\n\n## Experimental Methodology\n### Planetary Regolith Simulant\nThe simulant was created by bonding Fe3O4 magnetic nanoparticles around quartz particles. This allowed the simulation of:\n1. Granular morphology\n2. Fine-grained particles\n3. Porosity/density-dependent weak interparticle cohesion.\n\n**Table 1: Physical properties of magnetic particles and quartz particles**\n| Category | Quartz particles | Magnetic particles |\n| :--- | :--- | :--- |\n| Mean particle diameter (μm) | 25 | 0.285 |\n| Bulk density (kg/m³) | 2,650 | 600 |\n| Specific gravity | 2.64 | 2.83 |\n\n### Gravity Simulation\nExtraterrestrial gravities (0.3g to 2.9g) were simulated using a magnetic device consisting of a long solenoid (uniform field) and short solenoids (linear gradient field) to apply a magnetic body force to the simulant.\n\n## Key Findings\n- **Unloading Behavior:** Soil pressure on buried structures unloads faster at lower gravities (Moon/Mars) than at Earth gravity during initial displacement.\n- **Gravity Dependency:** Gravity weakens the arching effect in granular planetary regolith. Soil arching tends to stabilize as gravity increases.\n- **Theoretical Solution:** A new theoretical model accounting for gravity-induced stress gradients predicts soil pressure on trapdoor-like underground structures with high accuracy.\n\n## Conclusions\nOff-earth construction must account for the difference in gravity as it significantly changes soil-structure interactions. The study successfully validated a method to estimate downward loading on underground structures in off-earth engineering applications.