# Space-native construction materials for earth-independent and sustainable infrastructure

**Author:** M.Z. Naser
**Journal:** Acta Astronautica 155 (2019) 264–273
**DOI:** https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actaastro.2018.12.014

## Abstract
A successful space exploration requires establishing permanent and earth-independent infrastructure that are not only resilient to the extreme environment of space but also preferably made of sustainable and indigenous “space-native” construction materials. This review covers feasibility of exploiting in-situ lunar and Martian resources as well as harvesting of elements and compounds, from near Earth objects (NEOs), to produce extra terrestrial materials suitable for construction of space-based infrastructure. This review also details material features and characteristics required to withstand the unique, and harsh, effects of space environment. In essence, this paper reviews past and recent advancements in construction-based materials that could be used in the design and development of space human bases and highlights design consideration for sustainable human settlements. Towards the end of this review, practical and technological challenges associated with development of lunar and Martian indigenous construction materials are identified and examined.

## 1. Introduction
Serious attention was first focused towards space exploration in the beginning of the twentieth century as well as during the Second World War, especially after the successful takeoff of Vergeltungswaffe-2, the first guided missile to reach the outer space. Few years later, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) was commissioned with the main goal of expanding space exploration efforts. Yuri Gagarin orbited the Earth in 1961 and became the first human to do so. He was followed by Neil Armstrong who became the first man to land on the Moon eight years later. In parallel with twelve manned Apollo Missions, six of which landed on the Moon, we also continued to remotely explore nearby space bodies and near galaxies in pursuit of a destination suitable for establishing outposts and human migration.

Due to their proximity of the Moon and Mars to Earth, past and recent studies continue to elude to the possibility of human colonization to these bodies [1]. While it is clear that transportation to (and from) the Moon require lesser energy, time, cost, and technology, an inertia towards pursuing exploration (and colonization merit) of Mars has been rising for the past few decades. This inertia capitalizes on number of challenges associated with the harsh lunar environment as listed in Table 1. For example, the gravity on Mars is about twice as much of that on the Moon, and Mars is fortunate to have a unique atmosphere that can offer superior shielding from various radiation sources [2]. Further, one lunar day is equivalent to 27 days on Earth, while one Sol on Mars is slightly longer than that on Earth (i.e. about 24 h and 37 min [3]). This large variation in lunar day/night time can cause detrimental health and psychological issues on human crews [4].

Whether the Moon or Mars is selected for manned exploration missions and to pave the way for large-scale human colonization, this migration is highly dependent upon development of resilient, eco nomical, and sustainable infrastructure that can house and safely guard human subjects and crews. Unfortunately, development of such infrastructure continues to be a major challenge that hinders our ability to realize Earth-independent space exploration programs. Since transportation of infrastructure (or raw/construction materials) can cost between $5000 to $20,000 to deliver 1 kg from Earth to the Moon; a cost with the potential to scale up if transportation is to reach Mars [5], another alternative would be to build and fabricate such infrastructure on the Moon and Mars using their own (i.e. indigenous) resources.

Remarkably, analysis on collected soils from lunar and Martian landing sites has verified that both the Moon and Mars hold a wealth of materials that can be processed to yield terrestrial-like construction materials such as concrete and metals [6]. It is due to the availability of such substances that number of studies have examined the feasibility of in-situ resources as a mean to establish economical space exploration programs [7]. While it is true that utilizing in-situ raw materials promotes natural development of Earth-independent and sustainable interplanetary infrastructure, our understanding of characterization, and processing of lunar and Martian in-situ resources continues to be lacking especially considering the extreme nature of space environment, including vacuum conditions and severe radiation effects [8].

In order to bridge this knowledge gap, a number of studies were carried out during the last few decades to investigate various aspects and features of space-native resources [9,10]. The outcome of such studies have predominantly engineered specifically tailored materials spanning from traditional construction materials, i.e. ceramics, and metals/alloys, to those of biological origin (nature-inspired), and/or possess special characteristics including self-healing and energy harvesting abilities [11,12]. The outcome of these studies has led to the realization that efficacious utilizing in-situ materials for space construction could reduce the overall cost of a human settlement from $100 to an average of $40 billion (which is about 2–3 times the cost of typical aircraft carrier [13]).

Researchers such as Lin [14] and Toutanji [15], as well as others [16,17], point out that among all available construction materials, ceramics and/or composites (such as concrete) continue to be regarded as most suitable for use in space-based civil infrastructure. This is due to the fact that the behavior of concrete under severe working environments, i.e., radiation, high temperature, etc., is well-documented (e.g.: nuclear power plants) [18,19]. Still, the behavior and performance of concrete materials under combination of aforementioned conditions along with vacuum and absence/low gravity has not been fully investigated yet [12,18].

The recent announcements made by the European Space Agency (ESA) and National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) of a target deadline to start sending manned missions to the Moon on 2021 and to Mars by 2030 call on engineering and material science community to develop construction materials and technologies that enable development of sustainable and Earth-independent space infra structure. In support of these announcements, this review aims to present a survey of past and most recent research findings on extraterrestrial materials suitable for construction applications in space environment. The present review explores feasibility of utilizing space-native constituents in terms of in-situ lunar and Martian resources as well as elements harvested from Near-Earth Objects (NEOs) to permit development of astro-construction materials. This survey addresses adverse effects of the harsh space environments on such materials and highlights associated venues in-need of immediate research and development.

## 2. Space environment, and resources

### 2.1. Space environment
Space comprises of a multitude of environments (and actions) that are largely different their Earth counterparts [20]. These actions not only affect fundamental aspects of material formation but also the behavior of materials as well as, their performance, and characteristics. The three main differences between the environments in Earth, Moon (Luna), and Mars are often band together under radiation, vacuum, and low gravitational forces. Radiation is defined as the transit of energy in the form of high-speed particles and electromagnetic waves [21].

**Table 1: Selected differences between Earth, Moon, and Mars [2].**
| Parameter | Earth | Moon | Mars |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Total mass compared to Earth (%) | 1.0 | 1.2 | 10.7 |
| Approximate distance from Earth (km) | 0.0 | 3.84 × 10⁵ | 2.25 × 10⁸ |
| Day duration (hrs) | 23.9 | 655.7 | 24.7 |
| Revolution period (days) | 365.3 | 29.5 | 686.9 |
| Average surface temperature (ºC) | 13 | −30 | −57 |
| Atmospheric pressure (kPa) | 101.3 | negligible | 0.7 |

Radiation occurs due to electromagnetism such as gamma rays and galactic cosmic radiation which comprise of transmitting heavy ions with a speed approaching the speed of light. Radiation arises from solar and galactic flares resulting from supernova explosions [21,22].

Another dissimilarity between Earth, Moon, and Mars is the weak atmosphere in the last two space bodies. The atmosphere of Earth primarily comprises of Oxygen and Nitrogen, the Moon on the other hand, does not technically have an atmosphere (mainly due to its low gravity). The atmosphere surrounding Mars consists of Carbon Dioxide, Nitrogen, and Argon and is one percent of that on Earth [31]. The presence of weak atmosphere cause large thermal fluctuations to occur on the surface of the Moon and Mars. The thermal fluctuation on the Moon and Mars varies between −173 and 127 °C and between −60 and 125 °C, respectively. A fragile atmosphere amplifies effects of vacuum by further causing materials to dry-out and outgas. The hard vacuum has a small magnitude of 3 × 10⁻¹³ kPa to 0.7 kPa on the Moon and Mars, respectively, as compared to Earth (∼101.3 kPa). In one study, Kanamori et al. [23] examined the long-term exposure to vacuum conditions and concluded that vacuum conditions led water to loss and can accelerate material deterioration of mortar specimens.

The lack of atmosphere on the Moon and presence of a very thin atmosphere on Mars shapes a fragile shield against space debris including meteorites and/or micrometeorites. The impact effect of such debris particles was examined by Lindsay [24] as well as Toutanji et al. [25]. These researchers have shown that space particles as small as one thousand of a gram may reach a speed of 20–70 km/s. Toutanji et al. [25] also reported outcome of tests carried out by firing projectiles of a mass of 1.4 × 10⁻⁴ g into concrete samples at a speed of ∼6 km/s. In these tests, the impact of projectiles caused craters damage as large as 1.3 cm diameters in some concrete specimens. The findings of these experiments reveal the disturbing effects of space debris impact, and emphasize the integration of highly resilient construction materials with high shielding properties.

### 2.2. Space resources
Two main concepts have been proposed over the past few years to arrive at sustainable and Earth-independent space infrastructure. These concepts involve:
1) Direct (or immediate) use of in-situ raw materials available on the Moon and Mars,
2) Mining and harvesting Near-Earth Objects (NEOs) for minerals and compounds,

Realizing the above two concepts is tied with developing effective handling and treatment techniques for extracting elements from collected raws (i.e. ore) to produce construction materials. This section details aspects and principles for exploiting available lunar and Martian surface (and underneath) resources, as well as harvesting of elements and compounds from NEOs.

#### 2.2.1. In-situ resource utilization (ISRU)
While the surface of both Moon and Mars continue to be extensively studied through remote sensing technologies, only six manned Apollo missions landed on the Moon (between 1969 and 1972). These Apollo missions managed to collect 381.7 kilo-grams of lunar soil and rocks from six different exploration sites. While manned exploration missions have not reached Mars yet, few probes and rovers are able to roam the surface of Mars and explore its environment. The success of these exploration missions permitted appropriate valuation of resources on the Moon and Mars and commenced fundamentals to realizing in-situ resource utilization (ISRU). In-situ resource utilization is defined as harnessing (or utilizing) raw resources found in-situ (whether on surface or subsurface) to produce products that allow efficient and sustainable robotic and human exploration [26].

Analysis on samples collected from the Moon and Mars showed that soil and rocks consist of fine particles (regolith). Regolith is commonly defined as a surficial layer covering the entire lunar, as well as Martian, surface. This regolith is formed by meteorite impact and corresponding physical desegregation of large rock fragments into smaller ones over time. The regolith layer varies in thickness from few meters to tens of meters across various locations. Gradation data for a lunar soil were reported by Cesaretti et al. [27] who also and noted that approximately half of analyzed lunar sample consists of well-graded grains with small-sized diameters (< 75 μm). Similarly, Heiken [28] also analyzed actual lunar samples and reported that grains in lunar regolith has an average size between 40 and 270 μm. Although samples from Martian soil have not been brought back, Viking landers and Mariner-9 orbiters as well as on-site analysis has confirmed that soil on Mars has an average grain size that varies between 70 and 800 μm [29].

The aforementioned studies, along with others [30,31], also reported that lunar and Martian soil and rocks have unique characteristics such as lack of water, common presence of metallic iron, as well as traces of few chemical elements. Nonetheless, the most of these minerals that make up lunar and Martian soil and rocks are (with a few exceptions) also found on Earth. For example, lunar and Martian soils contain large amounts of silicon dioxide (SiO2), alumina (Al2O3), sulfur (S), and iron (FeO). A Comparison of chemical contents between lunar and Martian samples as well as terrestrial cement is shown in Table 2.

**Table 2: Chemical compositions (wt.%) of Martian and lunar soil samples.**
| Constituent | Lunar sampleᵃ | Lunar sampleᵇ | Martian sampleᶜ | Cementᵈ |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| SiO₂ | 45.03 | 37.79 | 44.7 | 20.13 |
| Al₂O₃ | 21.09 | 19.66 | – | – |
| FeO | 16.45 | 8.44 | 8.3 | 1.19 |
| Fe₂O₃ | 8.01 | 10.74 | 5.6 | 64.01 |
| MgO | 7.27 | 8.85 | 5.7 | 5.98 |
| CaO | 2.54 | 12.97 | 0.9 | 0.37 |
| K₂O | 0.06 | 0.05 | < 0.3 | 0.77 |
| TiO₂ | – | – | 18.2 | 2.35 |
| SO₃ | – | – | 7.7 | – |
| Cl | – | – | 0.7 | – |
_ᵃ Apollo 12 and. ᵇ Apollo 17 (Greeley and Spudis [33]). ᶜ Chryse Planitia (Toulmin et al. [34]). ᵈ From Khitab et al. [35]._ 

Another material that is widely available on the Moon and Mars is basalt. Basalt is a mafic extrusive comprising of more than 90% of volcanic rocks... This material is mainly made of SiO2 and has a density of 2600 kg/m³. Further, basalt also has a compressive strength in the range of 140–290 MPa which is about 4–6 times stronger than commercially normal strength concrete.

**Table 3: Properties of lunar in-situ materials [30].**
| Property | Basalt rock | Cast regolith | Lunar glass |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Compressive strength (MPa) | 140–290 | 538 | – |
| Tensile strength (MPa) | – | 34.5 | – |
| Density (kg/m³) | 2600 | 3000 | – |
| Modulus of elasticity (GPa) | – | 100 | 450 |
| Coefficient of thermal expansion (1/°C). | – | 8 × 10⁻⁶ | – |
| Bending strength (MPa) | – | – | 100–125 |

### 2.3. Harvesting materials from NEOs
In lieu of ISRU, harvesting of materials (element/compounds) from Near-Earth Objects (NEOs) such as asteroids and/or moons could potentially lead to sustainable space exploration programs... Lewis [38] reported that some meteorites can contain free metals with high concentration of about 100 times that in lunar regolith. 

## 3. Properties of space-native construction materials
### 3.1. Concrete-like hybrids
The inherent resiliency and durable characteristics of concrete have established its potential as the first material of choice for lunar and Martian constructions [14]. Cullingford and Keller [49] tested number of 300 × 150 mm concrete cylinders under semi-vacuum conditions of magnitude of 3.99 × 10⁻⁴ Pa. These researchers reported that properly designed traditional concrete could achieve adequate performance under extreme temperature and vacuum conditions. 

Lin et al. [9] investigated the performance of actual lunar soil, awarded by NASA, in terms of physical properties, and feasibility as aggregates for fabrication of lunar concrete... Outcome of these tests infer that it is possible to fabricate concrete with moderate-to-high compressive strength and modulus reaching about 76 MPa and 21 GPa, respectively.

Another variant of polymer concrete, is epoxy concrete which was investigated by Reis and Ferreira [58]... sulfur concrete has gained major attraction in the last few years, especially after detecting high amounts of troilite (FeS) on the Moon and Mars. 

**Table 4: Properties of lunar and Martian concrete [54].**
| Property | Lunar concrete | Martian concrete |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Compressive strength (MPa) | 39–75.7 | 20–63 |
| Tensile Strength (MPa) | 8.3 | 2.7–3.6 |
| Density (kg/m³) | 2600 | – |
| Young's modulus (GPa) | 21.4 | 6.5–10 |
| Coefficient of thermal expansion (1/°C). | 5.4 × 10⁻⁶ | – |
| Bending strength (MPa) | – | 1.65 |

### 3.2. Metals and alloys
Though metals are not readily available on Luna or Mars, elements that exist in lunar and Martian in-situ resources could be first extracted and then used to produce metals (or even alloys). 

**Table 5: Properties of lunar and Martian elements.**
| Element | Tensile strength (MPa) [76] | Specific gravity [76] | Young's modulus (GPa) [76] | Melting point (ºC) [77] | Elongation [77] | wt. (%) [72] |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Al | 170 | 2.7 | 70 | 660 | 45 | 7.5 |
| Mg | 200 | 1.7 | 45 | 650 | 5 | 6.5 |
| Fe | 280 | 7.9 | 196 | 1535 | 45 | 4.5 |
| Ti | 2300 | 4.6 | 119 | 3287 | 18 | 1.5 |

**Table 6: Properties of various metal alloys.**
| Property | 2014-T6 [87] | 8090-T8771 [88] | ZCM711 [88] | Ti6Al4V [92] | Beryllium Alloy [93,94] |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Ultimate strength (MPa) | – | 441.3 | 275 | 925 | 307 |
| Yield strength (MPa) | 410 | 344.8 | 185 | 860 | 222 |
| Elongation (%) | – | 1.25 | 12 | 5–18 | 2–3 |
| Young's modulus (GPa) | 72.5 | 80.7 | 45 | 108.5 | 303 |
| Density (kg/m³) | 2800 | 2519 | 1795 | 4420 | – |
| Coefficient of thermal expansion (1/°C). | – | 23 × 10⁻⁶ | 27 × 10⁻⁶ | 9.2 × 10⁻⁶ | – |

## 4. Design considerations for sustainable space infrastructures
Despite the fact that space structures are to be fabricated on the Moon and Mars, which is entirely different than that on Earth, these infrastructures are still required to provide a safe and workable environment for human settlers and researchers... As gravity on the Moon and Mars is about 17% and 38% that of Earth, both Clarke [96] and Benaroya et al. [97] suggested that design loads (i.e. dead loads, live loads etc.) can be scaled to the equivalent gravity of Luna or Mars.

## 5. Current challenges and future research directions
This review highlights main differences between Earth as well as lunar and Martian environments such as weak gravity, lack of atmosphere (vacuum), extreme radiation, high probability of meteorite (or micrometeorite) impact etc.

## 6. Summary and conclusions
This review shows that in order to achieve and maintain successful space exploration programs, sustainable and resilient Earth-independent infrastructure are to be fabricated of indigenous “space-native” materials. Specific outcomes of this review can also be summarized as follows:
* The extreme environment of space presents a unique challenge to development of extraterrestrial constructions.
* The abundance of high amounts of SiO2 in in-situ resources eludes to the possibility of producing cementitious terrestrial-like materials attractive and possible.
* Utilizing lunar and Martian resources would eventually lead to sustainable infrastructure that can be fabricated with minimum, if not completely free-off, Earth-based raw construction materials.
* Serious efforts are to be made to overcome challenges hindering space exploration, especially those associated with developing and processing construction materials, and structural design etc.