# Understanding the Soil Bearing Resistance in a Different Gravity Environment via Particle Density Scaling\n\n**Authors:** Sumana Bhattacharya and Seung Jae Lee\n**Affiliation:** Dept. of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Florida International Univ., Miami, FL.\n**Publication:** Earth and Space 2021, ASCE\n\n## ABSTRACT\nUnderstanding the bearing resistance of planetary regolith is essential to establish a long-term presence on the planets, e.g., extraterrestrial human habitat construction. This study hypothesizes a new approach to investigate the soil bearing resistance in a different gravity environment by simply scaling the particle density instead of reproducing the different gravity conditions (e.g., via parabolic flight). Terzaghi’s bearing capacity theory is used to develop the hypothesis, which is then tested using discrete element simulations.\n\n## INTRODUCTION\nExtraterrestrial soil research is vital to enable successful future surface activities such as human habitat construction. Understanding is limited by accessibility; while Surveyor spacecraft provided some data and lunar soil samples were returned, they are insufficient for extensive geomechanical experiments. Simulations like the Johnson Space Center lunar soil simulant (JSC-1A) are used, but laboratory setups struggle to simulate different gravities. This study proposes using density scaling in Earth gravity to reproduce planetary gravity effects.\n\n## Terzaghi’s Bearing Capacity Theory\nTerzaghi’s formula for soil bearing capacity is:\n\n$q_d = cN_c + \gamma D_f N_q + 0.5\gamma BN_\gamma$\n\nFor lunar/planetary soil with low cohesion, the equation simplifies where the unit weight $\gamma$ (which depends on density $\rho$ and gravity $g$) is the primary variable. The hypothesis is that $q_d$ in partial gravity ($g/n$) can be reproduced in Earth gravity by scaling density to $\rho/n$:\n\n$q_d = (\rho/n)g(D_f N_q + 0.5BN_\gamma)$\n\n## DISCRETE ELEMENT MODELING\nNumerical simulations were performed using the open-source DEM code, **LIGGGHTS**. \n\n### Table 1: DEM modeling parameters and values\n| DEM modeling parameter | Value |\n| :--- | :--- |\n| Gravity ($g = 9.8$ m/s²) | 1/6g, 1/2g, 1g for $1\rho$ particle density |\n| Particle density ($\rho = 2650$ kg/m³) | 1/6$\rho$, 1/2$\rho$ for 1g gravity condition |\n| Young's modulus of particle | $1\times10^{10}$ Pa |\n| Poisson's Ratio | 0.3 |\n| Coefficient of friction | 0.5 (~ tan 27°) |\n| Coefficient of rolling friction | 0.3 |\n\nTo keep computational costs manageable, particle size was enlarged 30 times (8 mm spheres). About 6770 particles were used with a time step of $1\times10^{-6}$ seconds.\n\n## RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS\nThe study compared simulated bearing resistance for:\n1. $1\rho$ density in $1/2g$ and $1/6g$ gravity environments.\n2. $1/2\rho$ and $1/6\rho$ densities in a $1g$ environment.\n\nOverall good agreement was shown between the results, demonstrating that Terzaghi’s formula holds true for the developed hypothesis. The soil bearing resistance of a planet can be studied in Earth gravity using synthetic soil particles (e.g., 3D printed) with proportionally scaled density.\n\n## CONCLUDING REMARKS\nThis study leverages Terzaghi’s bearing capacity theory to demonstrate that gravity effects on soil bearing resistance can be reproduced by adopting synthetic soil with proportionally scaled particle density. This provides an inexpensive alternative to parabolic flights and facilitates extraterrestrial soil research in general laboratory settings.