# Optimizing Magnesium Phosphate Binders with Boric Acid for Additive Construction Applications

**H. Alkhateb, H. Almashaqbeh, J. Edmunson, M. Fiske, Y. Najjar, and Damian Stoddard**

## ABSTRACT

The authors are proposing a comprehensive research approach and terminology for providing a framework to utilize an ordinary portland cement (OPC) alternative class of materials for both extraterrestrial habitats and terrestrial 3D construction applications, where sand and clay can replace regolith. Magnesia-based binders (MBBs) have shown a great promise for use in different additive construction (AC) applications due to its superior properties such as high compressive strength, rapid setting time, and excellent durability, in addition to the possibility of harvesting these binders from lunar and Martian regolith. Our primary objective in this research is to prove the concept of utilizing magnesia phosphate cement (MPC) composites with different additives, including boric acid, graphene nanoplatelets (GnP), acetic acid, and potentially Martian and lunar regolith simulants as a potential construction material for the planetary habitation exploration missions. Before adjusting the mix design properties required to meet specific 3D construction printing needs, several aspects must be studied in depth to provide a better understanding of the MPC paste and composite behavior. This work aims to give more insight into the relative physical, mechanical, thermal, and chemical performance of the MPC pastes with varying additions of boric acid. The experimental results show that boric acid can change the phase compositions of the MPC paste and affect its performance. It can improve the initial setting time of the paste and alter the structure of its binding products. Finally, our proposed research creatively utilizes artificial neural networks (ANN) to investigate and subsequently optimize both the MPC pastes and composite formulation for real-time adjusting of 3D printing processes based on the desired material performance criteria.

## INTRODUCTION

The inclusion of Additive Manufacturing (AM) technologies in the construction field has the potential to solve many structural-related problems and will reduce construction cost and time. Planetary autonomous construction is facing some technology maturation issues, such as the scarcity of readily-available printable construction materials, accompanied by material science challenges particular to the planetary surface environment, production process of the construction material, 3D printing process-related material requirements, construction-related material requirements, and handling of non-homogeneous and time-dependent material properties.

Utilizing in-situ resources for the construction of habitat structures on the Moon and Mars will increase the efficiency of long-duration space missions and will reduce the number of payloads launched from Earth necessary, thus reducing cost. Magnesium phosphate cement (MPC) is formed by the reaction between magnesium oxide and a soluble phosphate compound. Since both the Moon and Mars’s surfaces are rich with magnesium-bearing minerals, utilizing in-situ materials indicates that MPCs could be a candidate construction binder.

## METHODOLOGY

Utilizing MPC for AC applications requires specific rheological and hardened properties. The most critical properties that can affect the performance of the AC processes are (1) setting time, (2) workability, and (3) green strength. These critical features are correlated with the mix design of the MPC pastes to satisfy the required fresh and hardened properties for 3DCP.

### Materials

The MPC specimens are prepared by mixing dead-burned magnesia (MgO), monopotassium phosphate (KDP), boric acid (H3BO3), and distilled water. 

**Table 1: Chemical composition of the dead-burned MgO powder [Martin Marietta Magnesia Specialties]**
| Magnesium Oxide (MgO)% | Silicon Oxide (SiO2) % | Calcium Oxide (CaO)% | Iron Oxide (Fe2O3) % | Aluminum Oxide (Al2O3) % |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| 98.00 | 0.70 | 0.95 | 0.15 | 0.20 |

**Table 2: Physical and chemical properties of boric acid powder [Duda Energy, LLC]**
| Physical/chemical property | Description/Measured value |
| :--- | :--- |
| Appearance | Crystalline, White Solid |
| pH | 5.1 at 1.8 g/l at 25 °C (77 °F) |
| Melting point | 160 °C |
| Initial boiling point and boiling range | 1860°C |
| Relative density | 1.440 g/cm3 |
| Solubility | In Water: 4.7% @ 20°C; 27.5% @ 100°C |
| Decomposition temperature | 169±1 to HBO2 & -1 1/2 H20 at 300°C |

## RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

### Influence of boric acid

Figure 2 illustrates the effect of the boric acid content on the initial setting time for the MPC pastes for different W/P and M/P molar ratios. At constant M/P and W/P ratios, as the B/M ratio increases, the initial setting time increases until it reaches the maximum of 5% boric acid content. Increasing the B/M ratio beyond 5% will reduce the setting time. For example, for B3-22 group, adding 5% of boric acid can increase the initial setting time from 3.5 to 15 minutes.

### Mechanical Properties: Compressive Strength

For each W/P molar ratio, an optimal M/P molar ratio exists. For example, for a W/P molar ratio of three, the highest compressive strength obtained was at an M/P molar ratio of six. Boric acid content was found to be a critical factor in the MPC pastes compressive strength. For low M/P ratios, compressive strength decreases when the B/M ratio increases. However, for MPC specimens with high M/P ratios, results show that the boric acid effect on compressive strength is insignificant.

## ANN NUMERICAL SIMULATION

For this research, three databases, of 138 total data sets, have been used to develop the ANN models. The ANN1-1 model was developed to predict the fresh and the hardened properties of the MPC pastes including flow, initial setting time, and compressive strength. The graphical accuracy shows that the ANN1-1 model is predicting the MPC properties of interest with a high confidence.

**Table 3: Input/outputs of ANN1-1, ANN2-1, and ANN3-1 models.**
| Input | Outputs |
| :--- | :--- |
| M/P molar ratio | Flow (%) |
| W/P molar ratio | Initial setting time (min) |
| B/M ratio (%) | Compressive strength (MPa) |

## CONCLUSIONS

The results show that by manipulating the M/P, W/P, and B/M molecular ratios, one can tailor the MPC fresh and hardened properties for 3D printing. The presence of boric acid can affect the physical properties of MPC pastes, decreasing the workability of the fresh mix, and increasing the fluidity loss with time. Based on our results, using up to 5% B/M ratio can improve the initial setting time of the MPC paste while exceeding the 5% can reduce the initial setting time. Also, the mechanical behavior of the hardened MPC pastes is affected by the boric acid content.