# Investigation of heat transfer processes in multi-sized solar-sintered regolith for lunar ISRU program\n\n**Journal:** International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 214 (2023) 124387\n\n**Authors:** Yuankun Zhang, Matthew Shaw, Geoffrey Brooks, Muhammad Akbar Rhamdhani, Chunsheng Guo, Zhuosheng Han, Thomas Jackson, Gregory Judkins\n\n## Abstract\nEffective Thermal Conductivity (ETC) prediction of sintered lunar regolith plays a crucial role in developing extraterrestrial thermal processing and construction techniques for In-situ Resource Utilization (ISRU) projects on the Moon. Herein, we presented a mechanistic model to estimate the ETC of sintered lunar regolith. The Monte-Carlo method was applied to simulate the thermal neck resistance between multi-scaled particles, while the irregular particle geometry was characterized by shape factors. The presented model was experimentally validated by the measured ETC and specific surface area of fabricated lunar simulant samples LMS-1 with various granularities sintered under air, argon gas and low vacuum (10−3 Pa). The simulated temperature profiles at the steady state concur well with measured data obtained from the solar sinter testing with an average Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE) of 5.5%, which performs better than the un-sintered ETC model (RMSE=12.7%). The measured sintered depth was improved by 45% with an optimized particle size distribution (PSD) arrangement.\n\n## 1. Introduction\nEstablishing habitats on extraterrestrial planetary bodies is of particular interest for further deep-space investigations. High-temperature ISRU processes driven by concentrated solar energy have been recognized as a potential pathway to provide materials and power for long-term space explorations and construction on the lunar surface. Advantages include: 1) sufficient energy supply; 2) clean and renewable; and 3) easing transportation costs by using local resources like lunar regolith.\n\n### Table 1: Chemical compositions (wt.%) of selected lunar samples and simulants\n| Sample | SiO2 | Al2O3 | CaO | MgO | FeO/Fe2O3 | TiO2 | Na2O | K2O |\n| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |\n| Apollo | 45.3 | 17.2 | 11.9 | 9.0 | 12.1 | 3.1 | 0.5 | 0.6 |\n| Luna | 43.6 | 16.7 | 13.3 | 9.3 | 14.5 | 1.8 | 0.4 | 0.1 |\n| Simulant | 46.4 | 15.0 | 9.2 | 7.9 | 12.4 | 2.5 | 3.1 | 1.5 |\n| LMS-1 | 46.9 | 12.4 | 7.0 | 16.8 | 8.6 | 3.6 | 1.7 | 0.7 |\n\n## 5. Conclusions\n1. An analytical model of sintered LMS-1 thermal conductivity was developed considering the sintered neck resistance between multi-sized particles and unregular shapes. The model was validated with a mean error of 20.9% for specific surface area and shown to be suitable for air, argon, and low-vacuum environments.\n2. The FVM coupled to the ETC model was established for heat transfer simulation. The simulated temperature profile concurs well with measurements (RMSE=5.5%). Sintered depth was increased by 45% compared to original PSD by optimizing the arrangement of multi-sized particles.