# StarCrete: A starch-based biocomposite for off-world construction\n\n## Abstract\nRobust and affordable technology capabilities are needed before a sustained human presence on the lunar and Martian surfaces can be established. A key challenge is the production of high-strength structural materials from in situ resources to provide spacious habitats with adequate radiation shielding. Ideally, the production of such materials will be achieved through relatively simple, low-energy processes that support other critical systems. Here, we demonstrate the use of ordinary starch as a binder for simulated extraterrestrial regolith to produce a high-strength biocomposite material, termed StarCrete. After optimisation, lunar and Martian StarCrete achieved compressive strengths of 91.7 and 72.0 MPa, respectively, which is well within the domain of high-strength concrete (>42 MPa) and surpasses most other proposed technology solutions despite being a relatively low-energy process.\n\n## 1 Introduction\nA sustained human presence on the lunar and Martian surfaces will require habitats with thick walls and ceilings for protection against radiation exposure and meteor strikes. Due to the high cost of transporting mass from Earth to space, bulk construction materials will be produced from locally available resources – a concept known as in situ resource utilisation (ISRU). The stabilisation of loose regolith into a solid concrete-like material would provide shielding and allow the deployment of lightweight, inflatable habitats (Class II/III).\n\n## 2 Results and Discussion\nStarch gelatinisation is influenced by starch source, concentration, temperature, and additives. Potato starch was identified as the most effective binder, producing an UCS of 17.7 MPa in screening tests. Additives like urea and acetic acid were found to significantly enhance strength (up to 50% increase).\n\n### Table 3: Summary of mechanical property data following optimisation\n| Regolith | UCS (MPa) | Compressive modulus (GPa) | Flexural strength (MPa) | Flexural modulus (MPa) |\n| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |\n| MGS-1 (Mars) | 71.95 ± 1.45 | 4.12 ± 0.27 | 8.41 ± 0.60 | 658.4 ± 43.7 |\n| LHS-1 (Moon) | 91.68 ± 2.69 | 5.66 ± 0.09 | 2.14 ± 0.22 | 137.3 ± 37.7 |\n\n## 3 Conclusions and Outlook\nStarCrete offers several advantages: 1) risk reduction (edible binder), 2) practicality (simple solution with high TRL), 3) system integration (integrated with food production), 4) resourcefulness (low energy, water recovery), and 5) resource locality (produced on-site).